README.md, before:

![Poreduck Logo](/images/poreduck_logo.png)
# poreduck 
A comprehensive toolkit for running Oxford Nanopore's MinION - symbolised above by this poorly drawn duck.  
*In memory of Jacob & Jacob - two poor ducks.*  

poreduck is a set of python built commandline wrappers that can all be run simultaneously to pipe MinION reads
through to analysis in real-time.  

poreduck currently can be used for two key steps of handling MinION data:

1.  Transferring of reads from a laptop to a local server or hard-drive in real-time.
2.  Running of a local-basecalling algorithm with

## Tutorials
See the bottom of this page.
Or checkout this repo: https://alexiswl.github.io/ASimpleNanoporeTutorial/index.html

## Examples
An examples of poreduck usage is shown below:
`transfer_fast5_to_server.py --reads_dir /var/lib/MinKNOW/data/reads/ --server_name super_nodes --user_name admin
--dest_dir /data/storage/MinION/my_MinION_run`
where `/var/lib/MinKNOW/data/reads` contains a list of runs in `YYYYMMDD_HHMM_SAMPLE_NAME` format.
This then exports each of the fast5 files into `/data/storage/MinION/my_MinION_run/fast5` in .tar.gz format.

`albacore_server_scaled.py --reads_dir /data/storage/MinION/sample_name/fast5 --flowcell FLO-MIN106 --kit SQK-LSK108`
where `/data/storage/MinION/sample_name/fast5` contains a list of .tar.gz files each comprising 4000 fast5 files within them.

## MinKNOW version compatibility
Last tested on MinKNOW version 1.7.10

## transfer_fast5_to_server.py dependencies
### Dependencies (Windows specific)
1. Install Cygwin.

2.  Install sshpass (or don't and see 'how to make an id_rsa key' below):
    *  Re-run the setup of Cygwin, selecting for 'make' and 'gcc' as these don't seem to be in the default installation. 
    * Read through the link below to install sshpass. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37243087/how-to-install-sshpass-on-windows-through-cygwin/37250349

3.  Install pigz:
    * Download the pigz source file.
    * Type `make`.
    * You may need to install the zlib library if you get an error in b. This is done through the Cygwin setup.exe program.

### Dependencies (Unix specific)
1. pigz
    * either `brew install pigz`
    * or `conda install -c pigz`

### Python Dependencies
* python3.6 or higher is required. This script will break immediately if not satisfied!
All of the python modules listed below can be installed through pip or conda.
Non pre-installed python modules
1. paramiko
    * either `conda install -c anaconda paramiko`
    * or `pip install paramiko`
 
### Downloading this repo.
The following command will download this repo.
`git clone https://github.com/alexiswl/poreduck.git`

### Making an id-rsa key.
The sshpass is used to automatically perform the scp and rsync commands that would generally prompt a
user to enter their password each time one of these commands is run.
It's not securely sound as one could use the ps -ef command and see all the commands running on the system
with the password succeeding the sshpass -p parameter in plain text. Therefore I recommend using
the -no-sshpass option when running the script and setting up an rsa key on your laptop before hand.
This can be done easily for Mac, linux and Windows users.
#### Step 1:
Open up terminal/cygwin and type the following line:  
`ssh-keygen -t rsa`  
You will be prompted to store the password in your local ~/.ssh directory
under the name id_rsa. If you are using Cygwin on Windows, it is important that you 
keep this name. Other users may wish to change the name, but make sure you keep it in that directory.  
**If this file already exists, leave it and exit. Otherwise you risk losing access to places you take for granted.**
#### Step 2:
Copy across this key to the server  
`ssh-copy-id -i ~/.ssh/id_rsa <user_name>@<server_name>`  
You will be prompted to enter your password. Hopefully this is the last time you have to do so.
Although it looks like I have copied the private key, this command is clever enough only
to copy across the id_rsa.pub key.

## Albacore_server_scaled dependencies
### Albacore  
Albacore can be easily installed using pip3.

### Server (SGE)
This script has been modified to run on a server with SGE (Sun Grid Engine) job scheduling system.
You can test to see if you have SGE installed by running:
`qconf -help`
Please talk to your IT team to enusre that 'h_vmem' and 'hostname' options can be modified by the user.

Please let me know of any errors that you come across in this script.

## Tutorials
### transfer_fast5_to_server.py
Before commencing this tutorial, you are expected to have previously:
 * set up your ssh key with your server of choice.
 * Installed python3.6 and poreduck dependencies
 * Installed curl
 * Downladed this repo
#### Step 1. Download the following dataset using curl (946 M)
`curl -o poreduck_test_files.tar.gz https://cloudstor.aarnet.edu.au/plus/index.php/s/vTbIOQdILUOgazt/download`
#### Step 2. Move and untar the download
```bash 
mv poreduck_test_files.tar.gz /path/to/reads  
cd /path/to/reads
tar -xf poreduck_test_files.tar.gz  
```

You should see two folders have been created. Both end in '_TEST'

#### Step 3. Running the transfer script
We can now run the transfer script.  
```bash
/path/to/poreduck/transfer_fast5_to_server.py \ 
`--reads_dir /path/to/reads \   
`--server_name <server_name> \ 
`--user_name <user_name> \ 
`--dest_dir /dest/on/server \ 
`--sample_name TEST \ 
`--no-sshpass
``` 
 
Let's make sure that the data is there!   
`ssh <user_name>@<server_name>:/dest/on/server "ls -R /dest/on/server/"`

Should return a list of all the files we have created.

### Resolving python version conflicts.
Albacore runs only on 3.5 while poreduck requires 3.6.
First of all, 3.6 is better so this should be your standard python3.
You can determine your version using:
`python3 --version`
#### Python3.6
If you are not on python3.6, I recommend you download anaconda3 using the following commands.
```bash
# Set the version number
anaconda_version="4.4.0"
# Download anaconda3 using the wget command
wget https://repo.continuum.io/archive/Anaconda3-${anaconda_version}-MacOSX-x86_64.sh
# Install anaconda. 
# -b forces install without asking questions.
# -p sets anaconda to be installed in our home directory.
bash Anaconda3-${anaconda_version}-MacOSX-x86_64.sh -b -p $HOME/anaconda3
# Now we need to update it.
conda update conda
# And we may need to install the latest version of git
conda install -c anaconda git -y
```

#### Upgrading your python version on conda.
If you're already using conda and you're not on python3.6,
try the following command:
`conda install python==3.6`

### Creating a python environment:
As stated before, albacore puts us in a dilemma.
Here we can create an environment for albacore.
```bash
PYTHON_VERSION=3.5
conda create --name albacore_env python=${PYTHON_VERSION} anaconda
# Activate environment
source activate albacore_env
# Create a standard yaml file
conda env export > standard.yaml
# Update libraries (this may take some time)
conda update --all
# Download albacore pip wheel for mac
wget https://mirror.oxfordnanoportal.com/software/analysis/ont_albacore-1.2.6-cp36-cp36m-macosx_10_11_x86_64.whl
# Or Linux
wget https://mirror.oxfordnanoportal.com/software/analysis/ont_albacore-1.2.6-cp35-cp35m-manylinux1_x86_64.whl
# Install albacore using pip
pip install ont_albacore-*.whl  # Star represents 
# Write what we have installed to file
conda env export > albacore.yaml
# Decativate the albacore environment
source deactivate
```

### Configuring your environment.
You may wish to add a .bashrc equivalent to when you open this environment
This can be configured as follows.
```bash
cd /home/jsmith/anaconda3/envs/analytics
mkdir -p ./etc/conda/activate.d
mkdir -p ./etc/conda/deactivate.d
touch ./etc/conda/activate.d/env_vars.sh
touch ./etc/conda/deactivate.d/env_vars.sh
```

For further reading see:
https://conda.io/docs/using/envs.html


## Running albacore
Before commencing this tutorial, you are expected to have previously:
 * created an albacore_env with python 3.5
 * installed python3.6, with python3 set to python3.6

Now that we have our albacore environment
we can add the `source activate albacore_env` command to the start
of each script.

Commit message:

Updated readme for yield_plot branch

README.md, after:

![Poreduck Logo](/images/poreduck_logo.png)
# poreduck 
A comprehensive toolkit for running Oxford Nanopore's MinION - symbolised above by this poorly drawn duck.  
*In memory of Jacob & Jacob - two poor ducks.*  

poreduck is a set of python built commandline wrappers that can all be run simultaneously to pipe MinION reads
through to analysis in real-time.  

poreduck currently can be used for two key steps of handling MinION data:

1.  Transferring of reads from a laptop to a local server or hard-drive in real-time.
2.  Running of a local-basecalling algorithm with

## Tutorials
See the bottom of this page.
Or checkout this repo: https://alexiswl.github.io/ASimpleNanoporeTutorial/index.html

## Examples
An examples of poreduck usage is shown below:

### Transfer the data across to the server
`poreduck transfer_to_server --reads_dir /var/lib/MinKNOW/data/reads/ --server_name super_nodes --user_name admin
--dest_dir /data/storage/MinION/my_MinION_run --sample_name lambda`
where `/var/lib/MinKNOW/data/reads` contains a list of runs in `YYYYMMDD_HHMM_SAMPLE_NAME` format.
This then exports each of the fast5 files into `/data/storage/MinION/my_MinION_run/fast5` in .tar.gz format.
The sample_name adds lambda to the suffix of each 4000 bin.

### Basecall the fast5 files.  
`poreduck albacore_on_server --reads_dir /data/storage/MinION/sample_name/fast5 --flowcell FLO-MIN106 --kit SQK-LSK108`
where `/data/storage/MinION/sample_name/fast5` contains a list of .tar.gz files each of which holds 4000 fast5 files.

#### Run some qc metrics and plots.
`poreduck qc_plots --no_csv --fastq_dir ./fastq/ --gzipped --output_dir qc_plots/ --clip --sample_name "Lambda Run"`

Let's go through some of the less intuitive parameters listed.

The --no_csv is used if you do not have a list of metadata files from transferring the data from poreduck.  
If you do, then you will have access to the mux number and duration times which add on a couple of extra plots.
The gzipped parameter is used if the fastq files are gzipped. 
Clip is used to prevent squishing of the histogram. Some reads are extra-long 
(but most likely pseudo reads, these are omitted from the plot)


## MinKNOW version compatibility
Last tested on MinKNOW version 1.7.14

## transfer_fast5_to_server.py dependencies
### Dependencies (Windows specific)
1. Install Cygwin.

2.  Install sshpass (or don't and see 'how to make an id_rsa key' below):
    *  Re-run the setup of Cygwin, selecting for 'make' and 'gcc' as these don't seem to be in the default installation. 
    *  Read through the link below to install sshpass. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37243087/how-to-install-sshpass-on-windows-through-cygwin/37250349

3.  Install pigz:
    * Download the pigz source file.
    * Type `make`.
    * You may need to install the zlib library if you get an error in b. This is done through the Cygwin setup.exe program.

### Dependencies (Unix specific)
1. pigz
    * either `brew install pigz`
    * or `conda install -c pigz`

### Python Dependencies
* python3.6 or higher is required. This script will break immediately if not satisfied!
All of the python modules listed below can be installed through pip or conda.
Non pre-installed python modules
1. paramiko
    * either `conda install -c anaconda paramiko`
    * or `pip install paramiko`
 
### Downloading this repo.
The following command will download this repo.
`git clone https://github.com/alexiswl/poreduck.git`

### Making an id-rsa key.
The sshpass is used to automatically perform the scp and rsync commands that would generally prompt a
user to enter their password each time one of these commands is run.
It's not securely sound as one could use the ps -ef command and see all the commands running on the system
with the password succeeding the sshpass -p parameter in plain text. Therefore I recommend using
the -no-sshpass option when running the script and setting up an rsa key on your laptop before hand.
This can be done easily for Mac, linux and Windows users.
#### Step 1:
Open up terminal/cygwin and type the following line:  
`ssh-keygen -t rsa`  
You will be prompted to store the password in your local ~/.ssh directory
under the name id_rsa. If you are using Cygwin on Windows, it is important that you 
keep this name. Other users may wish to change the name, but make sure you keep it in that directory.  
**If this file already exists, leave it and exit. Otherwise you risk losing access to places you take for granted.**
#### Step 2:
Copy across this key to the server  
`ssh-copy-id -i ~/.ssh/id_rsa <user_name>@<server_name>`  
You will be prompted to enter your password. Hopefully this is the last time you have to do so.
Although it looks like I have copied the private key, this command is clever enough only
to copy across the id_rsa.pub key.

## Albacore_server_scaled dependencies
### Albacore  
Albacore can be easily installed using pip3.

### Server (SGE)
This script has been modified to run on a server with SGE (Sun Grid Engine) job scheduling system.
You can test to see if you have SGE installed by running:
`qconf -help`
Please talk to your IT team to enusre that 'h_vmem' and 'hostname' options can be modified by the user.

Please let me know of any errors that you come across in this script.

## Tutorials
### transfer_fast5_to_server.py
Before commencing this tutorial, you are expected to have previously:
 * set up your ssh key with your server of choice.
 * Installed python3.6 and poreduck dependencies
 * Installed curl
 * Downladed this repo
#### Step 1. Download the following dataset using curl (946 M)
`curl -o poreduck_test_files.tar.gz https://cloudstor.aarnet.edu.au/plus/index.php/s/vTbIOQdILUOgazt/download`
#### Step 2. Move and untar the download
```bash 
mv poreduck_test_files.tar.gz /path/to/reads  
cd /path/to/reads
tar -xf poreduck_test_files.tar.gz  
```

You should see two folders have been created. Both end in '_TEST'

#### Step 3. Running the transfer script
We can now run the transfer script.  
```bash
/path/to/poreduck/transfer_fast5_to_server.py \ 
`--reads_dir /path/to/reads \   
`--server_name <server_name> \ 
`--user_name <user_name> \ 
`--dest_dir /dest/on/server \ 
`--sample_name TEST \ 
`--no-sshpass
``` 
 
Let's make sure that the data is there!   
`ssh <user_name>@<server_name>:/dest/on/server "ls -R /dest/on/server/"`

Should return a list of all the files we have created.

### Resolving python version conflicts.
Albacore runs only on 3.5 while poreduck requires 3.6.
First of all, 3.6 is better so this should be your standard python3.
You can determine your version using:
`python3 --version`
#### Python3.6
If you are not on python3.6, I recommend you download anaconda3 using the following commands.
```bash
# Set the version number
anaconda_version="4.4.0"
# Download anaconda3 using the wget command
wget https://repo.continuum.io/archive/Anaconda3-${anaconda_version}-MacOSX-x86_64.sh
# Install anaconda. 
# -b forces install without asking questions.
# -p sets anaconda to be installed in our home directory.
bash Anaconda3-${anaconda_version}-MacOSX-x86_64.sh -b -p $HOME/anaconda3
# Now we need to update it.
conda update conda
# And we may need to install the latest version of git
conda install -c anaconda git -y
```

#### Upgrading your python version on conda.
If you're already using conda and you're not on python3.6,
try the following command:
`conda install python==3.6`

### Creating a python environment for albacore:
As stated before, albacore puts us in a dilemma.
Here we can create an environment for albacore.
```bash
PYTHON_VERSION=3.5
conda create --name albacore_env python=${PYTHON_VERSION} anaconda
# Activate environment
source activate albacore_env
# Create a standard yaml file
conda env export > standard.yaml
# Update libraries (this may take some time)
conda update --all
# Download albacore pip wheel for mac
wget https://mirror.oxfordnanoportal.com/software/analysis/ont_albacore-1.2.6-cp36-cp36m-macosx_10_11_x86_64.whl
# Or Linux
wget https://mirror.oxfordnanoportal.com/software/analysis/ont_albacore-1.2.6-cp35-cp35m-manylinux1_x86_64.whl
# Install albacore using pip
pip install ont_albacore-*.whl  # Star represents 
# Write what we have installed to file
conda env export > albacore.yaml
# Decativate the albacore environment
source deactivate
```

### Configuring your environment.
You may wish to add a .bashrc equivalent to when you open this environment
This can be configured as follows.
```bash
cd /home/jsmith/anaconda3/envs/analytics
mkdir -p ./etc/conda/activate.d
mkdir -p ./etc/conda/deactivate.d
touch ./etc/conda/activate.d/env_vars.sh
touch ./etc/conda/deactivate.d/env_vars.sh
```

For further reading see:
https://conda.io/docs/using/envs.html


## Running albacore
Before commencing this tutorial, you are expected to have previously:
 * created an albacore_env with python 3.5
 * installed python3.6, with python3 set to python3.6

Now that we have our albacore environment
we can add the `source activate albacore_env` command to the start
of each script.
